This painting illustrates a passage from the great 17th century Persian epic history, the Shahnama
Rustam rescues Bizhan from the Pit tells the story of the fearful leader Rustam and his imprisoned companion Bizhan.
The image dramatizes the heroic aspects of Rustam through the use of scale, as seen in the oversized figure.
Rustam is the son of Zal who was an Iranian king.
He is a celebrated legendary character as he appears in some of the most popular poems of the Shahnama.
This scene is shown a few moments after Rustam lifted the boulder that was blocking the hole.
As each of Rustam’s warriors who accompanied him into the mountains were unable to
complete the task of removing the boulder they stood aside with looks of despair.
On top of the hill was a fire that shone brightly, highlighting Rustam
Rustam cried out a prayer “oh please God, give me the strength to move this boulder”
and at once lifted the boulder to get to Bizhan.
Rustam then hollered down to Bizhan curious how he got himself into such a horrendous predicament asking
“how camest thou to such a luckless plight?”
Bizhan, looking up at the magnificent Rustam is joyous to hear that he has come for him.
Rustam urgently demands an apology from Bizhan.
He asks that he grant forgiveness to his envious companion Gurgin and if not
then he has no option but to leave him in the hole to die.
Threatening with this ultimatum Bizhan is left with no choice but to make amends with Gurgin
At this time Rustam throws down his lasso into the pit, which is pictured
and hand over hand without aid pulled out Bizhan.
The condition of Bizhan was dire and mangy from being in the pit.
His body was restrained by chains which Rustam snapped with his bare hands.
Freed at last the two mounted their horses and headed back to Rustam’s home
where Bizhan could be cleaned up and would make amends with Gurgin.
Features such as the tilt of the trees in the background and abstract patterns in the sky
make it feel as if it is stormy outside
The centrality of Rustam and Bizhan allow the viewer to easily understand
that they are the focal point of the image as all the other characters are placed off to either side.
Many of these other characters have a hand resting against their chest
appearing to be concerned of the situation.
There is a lack of architectural presence as the image chooses
to focus more on the natural and human relationships.